The whole point of this report was simply supposed to be an exploration on my part, where I try to find cool trends in Premier League Match Data due to being a supporter of the League for over 14 years. After doing so, some of the things we learned during the journey.

First we looked at the distribution of goals scored in a win and a draw, and found that if a team wants to win a game, they will need to score 2 goals in around 75% of games, but what's more is that scoring 2 goals also decreases your chance of losing substantially. Moreover, we looked at a bar graph of the counts that a team scores N number of goals in a game and that it looked exactly like a Poisson distribution. We then used the built-in function to overlay a Poisson distribution over the barplot, and found that the library predicted a mean of 2.79 goals per game for an individual team. This seemed incredibly high, and so we conducted a Null Hypothesis Test that the mean was infact 2.79, and looked at the last 5 matchweeks in the 23/24 Premier League season, and found that each week generated a p-value much less than 0.05 giving us strong evidence against our hypothesis, suggesting a mean value smaller than 2.79 by looking at the sample means.

A common belief shared by fans is that playing at Home gives a team an advantage since they are playing on a field they are comfortable with, and since the stands are filled majority with fans of the team who will whistle, boo, and have taunting chants on the opponent to throw them off their game. Interestingly, when looking at the count of results of a game at Full Time, we find that there were about 100 more wins at Home than there were by Away teams over an 800 game sample size which is quite significant. What's more is we took a look at a scatter plot where we analyzed the extremes of the relationship between Shots and Shots on Target, and labeled data Points given by an Away team and a Home team, and found that Home teams statistically have better shooting rates compared to Away teams. The importance of this metric is further emphasized when creating a Machine Learning Model using Decision Trees and the k-NN method, when we find that the models would primarily base their prediction of the result of a game, based off of the number of shots taken by the Away and Home team. The conclusion of these models found an accuracy of 0.62 when predicting the outcome of a game based of the Half Time Statistics, given by the k-NN model, and an accuracy of 0.579 on predicting the outcome of a game based off the Full Time Match Statistics, given by the Decision Tree Model.

0.579 and 0.62 are not extremely good results, but make sense given the variability of a soccer game. The team that shoots more won't always be the one winning, even if a team has 30 more shots than their opponent, even with a better rate of getting them on target, doesn't garuntee them the win. Sometimes if a Goalkeeper puts on an incredible performance they are able to withstand the attack, and win their team a game with only a handful of shots against their dominant opponent. The Crowd Attendance has an effect on the Home/Away team's performance, how supportive the fans are of their team (some are louder and more annoying for some teams more than others), how good the individual players are, as well as just having more data from the game such as Possession, shots off the woodwork, Offsides, number of passes, success rate of passes and much more would aid in the model having a more accurate prediction of the Full Time result. As such, for a more accurate and comprehensive model to be created, a much more thorough and detailed dataset would be required before the model can start predicting games better than a fan can.
